# MindSpeed Mask Normalization

## Background and Challenges

### 1. Megatron Source Code Analysis

1. Each device retrieves various data, including AttnMask, through `pretrain_gpt.py#L93`-`def get_batch`.

2. The first and last stages of PP retrieve various data, including AttnMask, through `megatron/training/utils.py#L276`-`def get_batch_on_this_tp_rank`. Other stages directly return None.

3. The first TP node generates the AttnMask via `megatron/core/datasets/gpt_dataset.py#L675`-`def _get_ltor_masks_and_position_ids`.

4. Other TP nodes directly generate an empty matrix with the same shape as the first node, and obtain the AttnMask generated by the first node through broadcast.

Tips: The above operations are enabled by default, and all generated AttnMasks are in the lower triangular shape. This can be disabled via `--no-create-attention-mask-in-dataloader`.

### 2. Problem Detection

1. Ascend's FA requires an externally generated AttnMask, so in addition to the basic lower triangular mode, an additional interface is needed to generate custom AttnMasks.

2. The AttnMask of non-PP head and tail nodes is none, which prevents FA acceleration from being enabled.

3. The generation, copying, and broadcasting of AttnMask are repeated with `get_batch` at each `micro_step`.

4. For long sequences, the generated AttnMask occupies excessive memory.

## Solution

### Approach

1. Provide a unified AttnMask generation API, where the same process reuses a global variable AttnMask to avoid repeated generation and copying.

2. Adapt the AttnMask compression mode to reduce memory usage.

## Application Scenario

Currently, mask generation for both FA and non-FA is supported, and the passed AttnMask can be none or in lower triangular mode.

In FA scenarios, when the sequence length is greater than 2048 or `ring_cp_algo` is used, the compression mode is adopted by default.

Other scenarios use the full mask.

## Usage

1. To address the above issues and ideas, AttnMask is directly enabled by default in MindSpeed, and the native mask generation method is no longer used.

2. A global variable `mindspeed/model/transformer.py`-`global _GLOBAL_ATTN_MASK` is provided.

3. The `--sparse-mode` parameter is provided to work with multiple FA modes. For information on the different modes of `--sparse-mode`, refer to the [torch_npu.npu_fusion_attention operator documentation](https://www.hiascend.com/document/detail/zh/Pytorch/60RC2/apiref/apilist/ptaoplist_001095.html).

4. Three additional APIs `def set_attention_mask`, `def get_attention_mask`, and `def generate_attention_mask` are provided in `mindspeed/model/transformer.py` to implement setting, getting, and generation functions outside the normal flow.

5. Provides the `def parallel_transformer_forward_wrapper` API is provided in `mindspeed/model/transformer.py`, which bypasses the limitations of `get_batch` and enables `generate_attention_mask` to generate the mask during the first forward pass.

## Application Effects

For example, in the lower triangular mode, setting sparse_mode=2 in compressed mode fixes the mask.shape to [2048, 2048], which significantly improves performance and reduces memory usage.

## Notes

Currently, the FA scenario only supports the lower triangular and Band modes. For other custom AttnMask modes, you need to manually set the attention mask or modify the `get_attention_mask` logic.
